Add External Data Store documentation [HZ-1260] (#514)
hazelcast/hz-docs: docs/modules/data-structures/pages/working-with-external-data.adoc

[[loading-and-storing-persistent-data]]

> Applications that access in-memory data are using gets, puts, or performing queries as described elsewhere in this documentation. When you work with an external data store, the Hazelcast cluster members are retrieving data from and writing data to that external data store independently of the application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Applications that need to access in-memory data use `gets`, `puts`, or xref:query:overview.adoc[other queries] to access this data. However, when you work with an external data store, members of the Hazelcast cluster retrieve data from and write data to the external data store independently of the application.
```

|Interface| Description

|MapLoader

> |This method gets invoked when the application requests a value from the map. If the requested value does not exist in memory, the `MapLoader.load()` method tries to load it from the data store. Once loaded into memory, the map entry remains until it is changed, movd, or evicted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|This method gets invoked when the application requests a value from the map. If the requested value does not exist in memory, the `MapLoader.load()` method tries to load it from the data store. Once loaded into memory, the map entry remains until it is changed, moved, or evicted.
```

* `shared`: Specifies whether the external data store factory returns reusable data stores for different Jet jobs and `MapStores` and `MapLoaders`. Specific behaviour depends on the implementation of the factory. The default value is `true`.

You can also add new external data stores dynamically at runtime, see xref:configuration:dynamic-config.adoc[dynamic configuration].

==== Built-in Data Store Factories

* `com.hazelcast.datastore.JdbcDataStoreFactory` creates JDBC-based external data stores. This implementation is based on link:https://github.com/brettwooldridge/HikariCP[HikariDataSource]. All properties are passed directly to `HikariConfig`. For available options see link:https://github.com/brettwooldridge/HikariCP#gear-configuration-knobs-baby[HikariCP configuration].
If there are more JDBC connections used on a single member from a single job, they will share the same data store and connection pool.

* For other types of data store, you need to implement `com.hazelcast.datastore.ExternalDataStoreFactory`.

== Loading Data From Your External Store

> The MapLoader interface includes the following features for loading data.

Reviewer: Just need to add a carriage return, (extra line) between the heading and the first line of text.

Author: Fixed: https://github.com/hazelcast/hz-docs/pull/514/commits/b42ceaf46f9243a3d62a34aee5f55cc0a66c0f4a

NOTE: The `MapStore` interface extends the `MapLoader` interface. Therefore, all methods and configuration parameters of the `MapLoader` interface are also available on the `MapStore` interface.

> == Defining External Data Stores

Reviewer 2: This feature is beta in 5.2. We should mark it as such.

> == Defining External Data Stores (Beta)

Reviewer 3: I think this content deserves its own page at the top level of *Configure and Manage Clusters*. It's defining a configuration procedure that connects the cluster to an external data store. You can then use this connection to interact with the data store in SQL, the Java Pipeline API, and MapStores. It doesn't make sense to hide this information on a page about MapStores.

An example of a configuration page is here: https://docs.hazelcast.com/hazelcast/latest/cp-subsystem/configuration This is a template that we should use. The only required sections are the description (what is this, why would you configure it, and how do you do it) and the list of config options in the table format: https://docs.hazelcast.com/hazelcast/latest/cp-subsystem/configuration#global-configuration-options

Author: I've moved the page: https://github.com/hazelcast/hz-docs/pull/514/commits/7733ba9a3fa3f42e9d7ff7d756f22d9f73880b87

> == Defining External Data Stores (Beta)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
== Configuring Connections to External Data Stores (Beta)
```

Can this be any data store or does it have to allow JDBC connections?

Author: Yes, it can be any data store we come up with, currently we've implemented on JDBC-based

> You can define external data stores in your `hazelcast.xml/hazelcast.yaml` configuration files or xref:configuration:configuring-programmatically.adoc[programmatically]. You can then reference these data stores in the xref:integrate:jdbc-connector.adoc[JDBC Connector] and in `MapStores` and `MapLoaders`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can define external data stores in your members' configuration files or with the xref:configuration:configuring-programmatically.adoc[Java member API]. You can then reference these data stores in the JDBC connector for the xref:integrate:jdbc-connector.adoc[Pipeline API], SQL mappings, and in MapStores and MapLoaders.
```

Reviewer 3: The name of the files add unnecessary detail that may not be true for the reader (these files can be renamed).

Reviewer 3: > You can then reference these data stores in the JDBC connector and in MapStores and MapLoaders.

How do you do this? Do we have an example or advice for doing so?

Author: > > You can then reference these data stores in the JDBC connector and in MapStores and MapLoaders.
> 
> How do you do this? Do we have an example or advice for doing so?

Yes, here: https://github.com/hazelcast/hz-docs/pull/514/files#diff-a5e296d87cffbaa364f8bd2d7e6b55ce89d61dbdb71f879a9b23fba2f0cd83bc

The following example defines a MySQL and a H2 data store.
[tabs]
====
XML::
+
--
[source,xml]
----
<hazelcast>
    ...
    <external-data-store name="my-mysql-database">
        <class-name>com.hazelcast.datastore.JdbcDataStoreFactory</class-name>
        <properties>
            <property name="jdbcUrl">jdbc:mysql://mysql.example.org:3306</property>
            <property name="username">my_user</property>
            <property name="password">my_password</property>
        </properties>
        <shared>true</shared>
    </external-data-store>
    <external-data-store name="my-other-database">
        <class-name>com.hazelcast.datastore.JdbcDataStoreFactory</class-name>
        <properties>
            <property name="jdbcUrl">jdbc:h2:mem:my-other-database</property>
        </properties>
        <shared>true</shared>
    </external-data-store>
    ...
</hazelcast>
----
--

> YAML::

Reviewer 3: We should have an example for doing this is Java too.

Author: Done: https://github.com/hazelcast/hz-docs/pull/514/commits/b5b20b3d096d78709ff7ef384743b4dc38bbba7f

        username: my_user
        password: my_password
      shared: true
    my-other-database:
      class-name: com.hazelcast.datastore.JdbcDataStoreFactory
      properties:
        jdbcUrl: jdbc:h2:mem:my-other-database
      shared: true
----
====

The external data store has the following configuration elements:

* `name` (required): The unique identifier for the external data store.
* `class-name` (required): The name of the `com.hazelcast.datastore.ExternalDataStoreFactory` implementation that will be used to create instances of the data store.
* `properties`: The configuration properties for an implementation of the external data store factory. See xref:#built-in-data-store-factories[Built-in Data Store Factories] for properties supported by specific implementations.
* `shared`: Specifies whether the external data store factory returns reusable data stores for different Jet jobs and `MapStores` and `MapLoaders`. Specific behaviour depends on the implementation of the factory. The default value is `true`.

You can also add new external data stores dynamically at runtime, see xref:configuration:dynamic-config.adoc[dynamic configuration].

> ==== Built-in Data Store Factories

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
=== Built-in Data Store Factories
```

* `com.hazelcast.datastore.JdbcDataStoreFactory` creates JDBC-based external data stores. This implementation is based on link:https://github.com/brettwooldridge/HikariCP[HikariDataSource]. All properties are passed directly to `HikariConfig`. For available options see link:https://github.com/brettwooldridge/HikariCP#gear-configuration-knobs-baby[HikariCP configuration].
If there are more JDBC connections used on a single member from a single job, they will share the same data store and connection pool.

* For other types of data store, you need to implement `com.hazelcast.datastore.ExternalDataStoreFactory`.

== Loading Data From Your External Store

> The MapLoader interface includes the following features for loading data.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `MapLoader` interface includes the following features for loading data.
```

NOTE: The `MapStore` interface extends the `MapLoader` interface. Therefore, all methods and configuration parameters of the `MapLoader` interface are also available on the `MapStore` interface.

== Defining External Data Stores

> You can define external data stores in your `hazelcast.xml/hazelcast.yaml` configuration files or xref:configuration:configuring-programmatically.adoc[programmatically]. Defined Data Stores can be referenced in xref:integrate:jdbc-connector.adoc[JDBC Connector] and in MapStores/MapLoaders.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can define external data stores in your `hazelcast.xml/hazelcast.yaml` configuration files or xref:configuration:configuring-programmatically.adoc[programmatically]. You can then reference these data stores in the xref:integrate:jdbc-connector.adoc[JDBC Connector] and in `MapStores` and `MapLoaders`.
```

> In the following example we define a MySQL and H2 data stores

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following example defines a MySQL and a H2 data store.
```

        <class-name>com.hazelcast.datastore.JdbcDataStoreFactory</class-name>
        <properties>
            <property name="jdbcUrl">jdbc:mysql://mysql.example.org:3306</property>
            <property name="username">my_user</property>
            <property name="password">my_password</property>
        </properties>
        <shared>true</shared>
    </external-data-store>
    <external-data-store name="my-other-database">
        <class-name>com.hazelcast.datastore.JdbcDataStoreFactory</class-name>
        <properties>
            <property name="jdbcUrl">jdbc:h2:mem:my-other-database</property>
        </properties>
        <shared>true</shared>
    </external-data-store>
    ...
</hazelcast>
----
--

YAML::
+
[source,yaml]
----
hazelcast:
  external-data-store:
    my-mysql-database:
      class-name: com.hazelcast.datastore.JdbcDataStoreFactory
      properties:
        jdbcUrl: jdbc:mysql://mysql.example.org:3306
        username: my_user
        password: my_password
      shared: true
    my-other-database:
      class-name: com.hazelcast.datastore.JdbcDataStoreFactory
      properties:
        jdbcUrl: jdbc:h2:mem:my-other-database
      shared: true
----
====

> External Data Store has the following configuration elements:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The external data store has the following configuration elements:
```

> * `name` (required) - the name of this External Data Store, has to be unique, used as identifier.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `name` (required): The unique identifier for the external data store.
```

> * `class-name` (required) - name of the `com.hazelcast.datastore.ExternalDataStoreFactory` implementation that will be used to create instances of the data store.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `class-name` (required): The name of the `com.hazelcast.datastore.ExternalDataStoreFactory` implementation that will be used to create instances of the data store.
```

> * `properties` - Configuration properties for a specific implementation of the Data Store factory. Check xref:#built-in-data-store-factories[Built-in Data Store Factories] for properties supported by specific implementations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `properties`: The configuration properties for an implementation of the external data store factory. See xref:#built-in-data-store-factories[Built-in Data Store Factories] for properties supported by specific implementations.
```

> * `shared` - specifies if the factory should return reusable Data Store for different Jet jobs and `MapStores` and `MapLoaders`. Specific behaviour depends on the implementation of the factory. Default value is `true`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `shared`: Specifies whether the external data store factory returns reusable data store processes for different Jet jobs and `MapStores` and `MapLoaders`. Specific behaviour depends on the implementation of the factory. The default value is `true`.
```

> You can also add new external data stores dynamically at runtime, see xref:dynamic-config.adoc[dynamic configuration].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also add new external data stores dynamically at runtime, see xref:configuration:dynamic-config.adoc[dynamic configuration].
```

==== Built-in Data Store Factories

> * `com.hazelcast.datastore.JdbcDataStoreFactory` - creates JDBC-based External Data Stores. Implementation is based on link:https://github.com/brettwooldridge/HikariCP[HikariDataSource]. All properties are passed directly to `HikariConfig`. For available options see link:https://github.com/brettwooldridge/HikariCP#gear-configuration-knobs-baby[HikariCP configuration].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `com.hazelcast.datastore.JdbcDataStoreFactory` creates JDBC-based external data stores. This implementation is based on link:https://github.com/brettwooldridge/HikariCP[HikariDataSource]. All properties are passed directly to `HikariConfig`. For available options see link:https://github.com/brettwooldridge/HikariCP#gear-configuration-knobs-baby[HikariCP configuration].
```

> If there are more JDBC connections used on a single member from a single job, they will share the same Data Store and the connection pool.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If there are more JDBC connections used on a single member from a single job, they will share the same data store and connection pool.
```

> For other types of Data Store you need to implement `com.hazelcast.datastore.ExternalDataStoreFactory`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* For other types of data store, you need to implement `com.hazelcast.datastore.ExternalDataStoreFactory`.
```

== Loading Data From Your External Store

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The MapLoader interface includes the following features for loading data.
```
